README.md, before:

# moeschberg_example_models

## User stories

As [a persona], I want to [ ], so that [ ].

| id | As                                                  | I want to                | so that                                                                                                                                                                                    |   |
|----|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---|
| 01 | user of the model                                   | be able to run the model | so that I get a calculated inventory or set of calculated parameters out of the model                                                                                                      | [sequence diagram](#user-story-01)  |
| 02 | user of the model                                   | be (at least) informed              | if some hidden allocation rule is being applied in the background for a more-than-one-output-process-model (e.g. how to allocate the "inventory" of a combined heat and power plant towards its co-products heat and electricity)                                                                                | [sequence diagram](#user-story-02)   |
| 03 | model developer                                     | store a model            | I can reuse it in the future                                                                                                                                                               |   |
| 04 | model developer                                     | store a model            | I can share it with others                                                                                                                                                                 |   |
| 05 | model developer from industry                       | store a model            | so that the model can be used to run, but cannot be decompiled, or intellectual property used within the model to be disclosed (note difference from academia/open source model developer) |   |
| 06 | model developer from academia/open source community | store a model            | so that the model can be opened and inspected (note difference from industry model developer)                                                                                              |   |
| 07 | model developer | provide a model with dependencies on other "supply" model | the model produces different results depending on its supply chain (e.g. coal power plant emissions depend on where the coal has come from) | [sequence diagram](#user-story-07) |

### Sequence diagrams

#### User story 01

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant user
participant sentier.dev
participant glossary
participant runner
participant ancillary models as ancillary models
note over ancillary models: gap filling<br/>storage<br/>transport<br/>unit conversion<br/>allocation
user->>+sentier.dev: give me the "inventory" for<br/>1 wind turbine (glossary:URI)<br/>with a nominal power of 2 MW<br/>in Denmark
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>wind turbine (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model A (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model A (glossary:URI)
runner-->ancillary models: optional call?
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model A<br/>including steel (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev-->ancillary models: optional call
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>steel (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model B (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model B (glossary:URI)
runner-->ancillary models: optional call?
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model B
sentier.dev-->ancillary models: optional call
note over sentier.dev: ...
sentier.dev-->>ancillary models: give me the additional "inventory" for tranport of "inventories"
ancillary models-->>sentier.dev: additional "inventory" for transport<br/>plus locations of prodution of "inventory" items?
sentier.dev->>-user: "inventory" for<br/>1 wind turbine (glossary:URI)<br/>with a nominal power of 2 MW<br/>in Denmark
```

#### User story 02

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
user->>+sentier.dev: give me "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity in Germany (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>1 kWh of electricity in de (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model A (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model A (glossary:URI)
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model A<br/>including electricity from chp (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>electricity from chp (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model B (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model B (glossary:URI)
rect rgb(191, 223, 255)
note right of runner: model B produces two products: electricity and heat<br/>some allocation rule has to be applied
runner->>user: which allocation rule to use?
note right of sentier.dev: Or should there be an ancillary module for allocation issues?
user->>runner: decision?
end
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model B
note over sentier.dev: ...
sentier.dev->>-user: "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity in Germany
```

#### User story 07

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
user->>+sentier.dev: give me "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity from coal power plant in Germany (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>electricity from coal power plant in Germany (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model A (glossary:URI)
rect rgb(191, 223, 255)
sentier.dev->>+runner instance A: run model A (glossary:URI)
runner instance A->>sentier.dev: PARTIAL "inventory" of model A<br/>including coal consumed in Germany<br/>excluding some direct emissions
note right of runner instance A: model A is dependent on the<br/>"inventory" and related attributes of Model B
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>coal consumed in Germany (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model B (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner instance B: run model B (glossary:URI)
runner instance B->>runner instance A: specific coal parameters<br/>like content of carbon, sulphur, mercury, etc.
note right of runner instance A: Should the running instances A and B talk directly to each other?<br/>Or via the orchestrator?
runner instance B->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model B
runner instance A->>-sentier.dev: FINAL "inventory" of model A
end
note over sentier.dev: ...
sentier.dev->>-user: "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity from coal power plant in Germany
```

## Wind turbine example

![sketch of wind turbine example](docs/Figma_wind_turbine.png)


## Design choices
Try and match terms for processes to the latest version (at the time of writing) [European Commission Common Nomenclature ontology](https://showvoc.op.europa.eu/#/datasets/ESTAT_Combined_Nomenclature,_2024_%28CN_2024%29/data)

# Sources / References
- [LCA_WIND_DK](https://github.com/romainsacchi/LCA_WIND_DK) a model of wind turbines in Denmark which gives the material inputs required (concrete, steel, fibreglass, etc)
- [windsch](https://github.com/romainsacchi/windisch) a model for the calculation of the masses of components (the nacelle, foundation, blades, etc) of a wind turbine given its power rating. 
- [European Commission Common Nomenclature 2024](https://showvoc.op.europa.eu/#/datasets/ESTAT_Combined_Nomenclature,_2024_%28CN_2024%29/data) an ontology for processes

Commit message:

Update description of methodology and observations from mapping exercise

README.md, after:

# moeschberg_example_models

## User stories

As [a persona], I want to [ ], so that [ ].

| id | As                                                  | I want to                | so that                                                                                                                                                                                    |   |
|----|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---|
| 01 | user of the model                                   | be able to run the model | so that I get a calculated inventory or set of calculated parameters out of the model                                                                                                      | [sequence diagram](#user-story-01)  |
| 02 | user of the model                                   | be (at least) informed              | if some hidden allocation rule is being applied in the background for a more-than-one-output-process-model (e.g. how to allocate the "inventory" of a combined heat and power plant towards its co-products heat and electricity)                                                                                | [sequence diagram](#user-story-02)   |
| 03 | model developer                                     | store a model            | I can reuse it in the future                                                                                                                                                               |   |
| 04 | model developer                                     | store a model            | I can share it with others                                                                                                                                                                 |   |
| 05 | model developer from industry                       | store a model            | so that the model can be used to run, but cannot be decompiled, or intellectual property used within the model to be disclosed (note difference from academia/open source model developer) |   |
| 06 | model developer from academia/open source community | store a model            | so that the model can be opened and inspected (note difference from industry model developer)                                                                                              |   |
| 07 | model developer | provide a model with dependencies on other "supply" model | the model produces different results depending on its supply chain (e.g. coal power plant emissions depend on where the coal has come from) | [sequence diagram](#user-story-07) |

### Sequence diagrams

#### User story 01

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant user
participant sentier.dev
participant glossary
participant runner
participant ancillary models as ancillary models
note over ancillary models: gap filling<br/>storage<br/>transport<br/>unit conversion<br/>allocation
user->>+sentier.dev: give me the "inventory" for<br/>1 wind turbine (glossary:URI)<br/>with a nominal power of 2 MW<br/>in Denmark
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>wind turbine (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model A (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model A (glossary:URI)
runner-->ancillary models: optional call?
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model A<br/>including steel (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev-->ancillary models: optional call
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>steel (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model B (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model B (glossary:URI)
runner-->ancillary models: optional call?
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model B
sentier.dev-->ancillary models: optional call
note over sentier.dev: ...
sentier.dev-->>ancillary models: give me the additional "inventory" for tranport of "inventories"
ancillary models-->>sentier.dev: additional "inventory" for transport<br/>plus locations of prodution of "inventory" items?
sentier.dev->>-user: "inventory" for<br/>1 wind turbine (glossary:URI)<br/>with a nominal power of 2 MW<br/>in Denmark
```

#### User story 02

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
user->>+sentier.dev: give me "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity in Germany (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>1 kWh of electricity in de (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model A (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model A (glossary:URI)
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model A<br/>including electricity from chp (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>electricity from chp (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model B (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner: run model B (glossary:URI)
rect rgb(191, 223, 255)
note right of runner: model B produces two products: electricity and heat<br/>some allocation rule has to be applied
runner->>user: which allocation rule to use?
note right of sentier.dev: Or should there be an ancillary module for allocation issues?
user->>runner: decision?
end
runner->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model B
note over sentier.dev: ...
sentier.dev->>-user: "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity in Germany
```

#### User story 07

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
user->>+sentier.dev: give me "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity from coal power plant in Germany (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>electricity from coal power plant in Germany (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model A (glossary:URI)
rect rgb(191, 223, 255)
sentier.dev->>+runner instance A: run model A (glossary:URI)
runner instance A->>sentier.dev: PARTIAL "inventory" of model A<br/>including coal consumed in Germany<br/>excluding some direct emissions
note right of runner instance A: model A is dependent on the<br/>"inventory" and related attributes of Model B
sentier.dev->>+glossary: who produces<br/>coal consumed in Germany (glossary:URI)?
glossary->>-sentier.dev: model B (glossary:URI)
sentier.dev->>+runner instance B: run model B (glossary:URI)
runner instance B->>runner instance A: specific coal parameters<br/>like content of carbon, sulphur, mercury, etc.
note right of runner instance A: Should the running instances A and B talk directly to each other?<br/>Or via the orchestrator?
runner instance B->>-sentier.dev: "inventory" of model B
runner instance A->>-sentier.dev: FINAL "inventory" of model A
end
note over sentier.dev: ...
sentier.dev->>-user: "inventory" for<br/>3 kWh of electricity from coal power plant in Germany
```

## Wind turbine example

![sketch of wind turbine example](docs/Figma_wind_turbine.png)


# Mapping
## Design choices / objectives
The objective for mapping is to try and match terms for processes to the latest version (at the time of writing) [European Commission Combined Nomenclature ontology](https://showvoc.op.europa.eu/#/datasets/ESTAT_Combined_Nomenclature,_2024_%28CN_2024%29/data)

> The Combined Nomenclature (CN) is a tool for classifying goods, set up to meet the requirements both of the Common Customs Tariff and of the EU's external trade statistics. The CN is also used in intra-EU trade statistics.
*Source: https://taxation-customs.ec.europa.eu/customs-4/calculation-customs-duties/customs-tariff/combined-nomenclature_en*

This tends to only cover physical tangible entities, and tends to exclude non-tangible entities as well as services, that can have significance for environmental or socia Life Cycle Assessment.

Important concepts or entities for environmental life cycle assessment that cannot be expressed with the EU Combined Nomenclature include:
- land transformation 
- electricity generation, transformation or transmission
- services or activities, like welding

This is not an exhaustive list and (hopefully) subject to change

# Sources / References
- [LCA_WIND_DK](https://github.com/romainsacchi/LCA_WIND_DK) a model of wind turbines in Denmark which gives the material inputs required (concrete, steel, fibreglass, etc)
- [windsch](https://github.com/romainsacchi/windisch) a model for the calculation of the masses of components (the nacelle, foundation, blades, etc) of a wind turbine given its power rating. 
- [European Commission Common Nomenclature 2024 visual explorer](https://showvoc.op.europa.eu/#/datasets/ESTAT_Combined_Nomenclature,_2024_%28CN_2024%29/data) an ontology for processes
